
210333268	2016-01-19 20:39:44	Nabil Babu	Ant World	"The system starts off as Langton's ant CA for a set amount of time, which can be changed by the user, after the set amount of time, the system switches to the Wire world CA. The system then remains as a Wire world CA randomly sending in ""sparks of data"" into the structure to see where the flow of data goes. 

This was a very interesting process since Wire world will have different properties and patterns based on the world that the Ant builds. "	"You achieve very interesting and fascinating results when you change the parameter for how long the ant builds(antTimer) its world and the percentages that it will turn when flipping cells(turnChance). By changing these parameters you can create a more chaotic world or a more structured world with straighter lines each of which have different visual effects once Wire world is enabled. 

"	"I was inspired by looking up different CA's that we did not cover in class and stumbled upon the Wire world CA. I found the idea of watching the flow of ""data"" through a structure very interesting. The only limitation I have with Wire world was that it needed a world. Certain patterns can be manually created that have interesting results in Wire world but I did not want to create a world. 

Thats when I turned towards Langton's Ant and saw that after a random chance is added to it and if time is applied to it, you can create interesting structures and patterns, essentially a ""world"". This ant world seemed like the perfect playground for the Wire world CA. "	"An extension I would like to see would be to run both Langton's ant and Wire world simultaneously and see how that can affect the overall structure.

I would also like to integrate an expanding Wire World, where only the tips of the world have a chance of extending when the data has reached it and thus slowly expanding the world. "	http://codepen.io/Nabil-Babu/pen/LGObbO?editors=001	

> Several great things here -- I like how you parameterized the ant to vary between simple lines and full on ant. I also like your control of the two modes by timing, and the dramatic effect of color introduction. The code is very clear and effective. I would like to see if there's a way to prime this with multiple ants, which can produce even more complex patterns. I'd also like to think about ways in which both the ants & wireworld can continue to run at the same time! 


210730471	2016-01-17 17:38:16	Rhys Mendes	Game of Pi	"The system is designed to show the interaction between a row of cells representing a dividend and a column of cells representing a divisor (initially conceived to be 22/7 to depict an approximation of pi)

Long term behaviors vary based on actual ratios of the input values, and enabling/disabling special options."	Prone to creating gliders. Enabling chance of two-parent birth allows the sim to keep running (no structure is ever truly stable), and enabling background noise (random spawning) increases the inherent chaos.	"Inspired by the basic Game of Life rule set, I wanted to find a way of representing a natural ratio such as pi, and so tried variations on creating 22 living cells and 7 living cells in specific arrangements, both on Codepen and on another Game of Life web simulator that allowed cells to be placed by clicking (allowed simpler prototyping but the plane was hardcoded to be infinite)
Eventually the configuration of perpendicular rows was found, with a diagonal offset."	Implementing other arithmetic operations should be pretty interesting to try.	http://codepen.io/rhys91/pen/LGzoWQ	

> Essentially, the ratios chosen define the initial conditions of the game of life; and you also added two probabilistic variations of the spawn rule. Some CA are very sensitive to the initial conditions, and the GoL can be too, but in this case it seems that after a few steps the initial state doesn't appear to have much difference. Just a note: you don't need to declare all variables (meep, moop etc.) in the top of the script -- if you only use them in one function, you can declare them in that function too -- this is usually more efficient, as well as less likely to lead to bugs.


210943306	2016-01-19 20:21:21	Xiao Lin	New Life	"The assignment was built on the example code Forest of fire, where the trees grow and there is a chance for the trees to get set on fire after being struck by lightning. There are multiples of forest burn at the same time, it burns in rectangular shape and then expands. Once the fire expands new trees will grow in the places where it just got burnt.
"	"For this project there isn’t any interaction between the user and program. It is interesting how life grows right back after it gets burned by the fire, and it grows while the fire is still expanding. Once the fire rectangle hits other burning rectangles, it cancels out each other.
"	I tried modifying the values to see if I could get different colours for it, fortunately I was able to get the green out of it. I've been playing around with the values to see what it does, and how it works. I've added a new condition in the code where it checks the neighbour for NE,NW,SE or SW. The current behaviour of the tree growth right after the forest burns,  it was done so by adding a new sets of possible state(the dot), and the alter of the values of the probability growth,spore, and lightning.	One of the possible idea for this project is to add multiple colours for the dots, divide the field into 4 sections with each section correspond to it's unique colour. In the long term when certain condition are met, then the colour might change. Another thing that I might add to the  map, is the real data into the values. For example, the (lighting strike data) into the probability of lighting strike value in the code.	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/RrjvVJ?editors=001	

> I like your ideas for future continuations, both the divisions into four colours, and the response to real data. It was interesting that you randomize the simulation parameters, so each time I reload the page it looks different; especially the behavior of the 'dot' state.

210949543	2016-01-20 02:04:19	Radi Hilaneh	The Fuse of Life	The idea behind my system was inspired by the Big Bang Theory. Out of almost nothing, I tried to create a universe that grows slowly to finally become the "Game of Life". It is interesting how it resembles the long time this universe took to be what it is now. 	My aim was to start the system with a single click of the mouse anywhere in the parameter and then add extra interactions with more clicks, but unfortunately, I was not able to figure out how to embed the mouse interaction part in the code. Therefore, and because I needed something to initialize the first "spark", I substituted the mouse part with a random cell generator that will start the system and sustain its existence.	Just like in the Forest code where fire can randomly start and destroy the surrounding trees, I tried to to create something that resembles black holes that will swallow the surrounding planets, but I was not able to get it to run.	"In the future, I would like to add gravity points and gravitational fields where small planets will gravitate towards bigger ones. Or planets close to black holes will start gravitating towards the hole until it vanishes.
I would also I would like to add the mouse interaction that will vary with different mouse clicks (for example, one single click will start an interaction and a double click will create a black hole).
It would also be great if I can create orbits, and in the long run, form solar systems or even multiple galaxies."	http://codepen.io/radihila/pen/ZQaPZR	

> I love how it starts -- very dramatic. Clever use of initial condition and background noise, and I appreciate the added color. Line 56: " if (random() < 1) " -- this is always true. Better to remove or comment out code that is redundant.

211305208	2016-01-20 11:03:36	Lu Li	Monster In Different World	"Monster In Different World System are divided into three region: upper, lower, and middle. Each region have different kind of rules. There are also four planets in the upper and lower region which generate different life form according to different rules. The middle region can be seen as a transport region that transport the life form from lower region to upper region that may be cleaned up by the moving boundary.  There is also a monster who is just going around and follow the rule of different region according to its own way. The monster may died in the process.  In long time, the system  appears to have a complex behavior 

"	Adding more monster in an ant array，change the direction of ant to change the path of the monster, the patterns it generates, and the color of it. Change return value or divide the return value c by 2 will get some very interesting patterns (All have been commented as //TODO Interesting to change).	I am able to merge the game of life, and Forest fire together, and embedded forest life in the game of life. I try to have a global variable that may change the rules of the system and itself changes according to the number's of cellular automata inside different region. I also try to make the 4 planets follow some kind of trajectory according to each other by assign the region  variables, and change the variable which will move the regions. The thing I try doesn't work well, so I am no able to make it happens.	Maybe adding continues states and transition rules to the monster, and make the transit rules of different region evolves depends on how many cellular automata inside the region can help to build the system behavior more complex. The system may also appear more interesting if I successfully implement algorithm I try but haven't realized it.	http://codepen.io/lukelee365/pen/vLWwOW	

> I can tell you spent a long time on this -- and it had me transfixed for quite a while. I really like the placement of the planets in combination with the three bands. The moving boundary adds a dramatic element -- a kind of "reaper". I couldn't see how/why from the code that the ant dies -- but it does seem to. The upper part alone is an interesting variation of the game of life, I wonder if this has been discovered before? Try adding "draw2D.color(0.5, 0.5, 0.5);" just before the "field.draw()" -- you can then see the different states going on there. I had fun playing with your suggested changes too. I like the idea of the forest-planets becoming mobile -- an easy way of doing that would be to drive their center coordinates from a random walker, or from a langton ant, and then apply that rule if the current cell is less than a certain distance from the planet center. Your further ideas are also interesting, I hope you can continue with it!

211305208	2016-01-20 11:14:18	Lu Li	FireWork	"It is interesting to look at too,but I like the Monster in Different World better
Firework System has three  firework,and explode in the scene. It aim to simulate the process of firework explosion."	Adding more monster in an ant array，change the direction of ant to change the path of the monster, the patterns it generates, and the color of it. 	Merge the Ant with the Game of Life	Maybe adding continues states and transition rules to the the explosion, and make the explosion more colorful.	http://codepen.io/lukelee365/pen/OMOYma?editors=001	



211338548	2016-01-20 00:13:15	Justin Hsieh	Life	I do not know why it does not work to my intension but what I intended  to do was to create an art piece which simulated a life form. This piece starts off with many life forms then becoming one. It settles itself into a one big life form. What I interests and surprises me is that you see something new each time you refresh the code. It is unique. It seems to hold a continuous system whose behaviours transforms the space its in and becomes stables which evolves to a homogeneous state.	The interaction it supports in one is that of the density of black and white cells, and another is due cell(same colour and different colour) interactions.	I combined and extended on two algorithms, one being the "Ising" algorithm and the other "Artificial Life".	I would like to add colour and more interaction and variations of global parameters in my algorithms. I would also like to play with the algorithm so it has some kind of user interaction.	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/LGOvvb?editors=001	

> Looks very interesting. You need to be careful with your code though -- your ants simulation is not inside the update() function, so it only actually runs once at the start. And the "var ants" is defined inside a function, so it doesn't exist once the function returns anyway. Also check the error console: "Uncaught ReferenceError: rsqrt8 is not defined". After I fix those bugs, I get this: http://codepen.io/grrrwaaa/pen/obEOjV?editors=001 -- which isn't as interesting anyway, so I'll ignore the ants altogether. Then the main change is the neighborhood used in the entropy() function, which is effectively resampling the space as if viewed through a refractive lens.

211413499	2016-01-20 02:18:55	Salim Sultanaly	Windy Day	For my assignment, I have used the Langton's Ant patch and made some modifications to it. The initial start point of the ant is now random, and instead of the ant starting to move from one location and continuing to move from there, the ant now changes its location randomly every time it's x and y values are equal. This allows it to make different sections or islands. The concept behind this patch is to simulate the movement of Langton's Ant on a windy day, where it is continuously being blown to different locations to move in it's set way.	"My assignment supports the following interactions:
- randomizes initial start point of the ant
- randomly changes location of the ant when its x value is equal to its y value, and thus makes the ant jump
- resets the entire screen to white after some time so as to be able to see the above interactions more clearly"	I was mainly inspired by Langton's Ant and tried to see how the concept would fit in different scenarios. One of the things I tried doing, but was unable to achieve good enough results in, was to have the patch start off with two ants, and each time any two ants collided a new ant would be spawned. Another thing I tried to play around with was to have a region in the center of the screen (or any location for that matter), which would be the head quarters of the ant queen. Any ant that came in contact with that region would spawn another ant from there. I was unable to get this to run smoothly as well. I kept running into infinite loops, or black screens. Finally, my third idea of a "Windy Day" was the one that I managed to get to work the best, without bugs or hindrances, and so am submitting it for this assignment.	"Some future extensions which the patch can take are:
- Every time the ant is blown by the wind to land at some new area, it could change its color to display the effects in a better way
- The conditions for the ant to jump due to the wind can be made more seamless and relate-able, maybe taking into account its neighboring cells. Maybe the wind can also be displayed using boundaries
- There can be more than one ant in the scene being effected by the wind"	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/WrXBjB?editors=001	

> The periodic blanking of the screen is a great idea. I also like your idea of having ants meeting and reproducing. I like the idea of changing color when blown by the wind too -- it would be great if that also affected behavior. I hope you get chance to figure out how to make these work.

211461803	2016-01-20 10:58:04	Mengmei Zhou (Rose)	Tale of Two Lands	"Experimenting with Langton's ants with regular initial patterns produced fairly regular weave-like patterns (Weaving Ants: http://codepen.io/zmmrose/pen/zrEVEm), and in contrast forest fire produces organic growth looking patterns, therefore I attempted to combine them to see how would they interact with each other.

The system is divided into two parts that are based on forest fire, and they only differ in the way that an empty cell, a tree cell, and a burning cell are represented. However, it was interesting to see very different interactions when ants are placed in the cells, although the tree growth tries to take over, regular block-like patterns dominates the top half land, and these patterns gets destroyed quickly on the bottom half land because of the ants take a different role due to different definition of cell values. In the long run, the system is stable since the ants and the forest does not let either to take over."	"In Weaving Ants, playing with how much gap between the initial lines gives rise to different weaving patterns. The symmetry of initial condition was important for them not to start random pattern too soon (see also Sword Ants http://codepen.io/zmmrose/pen/wMrBox). 

In Tale of Two Lands, it was more difficult to find a balance for interesting behaviour, since either ants or forest fire may take over depending on the variables below together: antspeed, growth probability, spore probability, lightning probability."	"The cells are divided into two parts by setting different values for an empty cell, a tree cell, and a burning cell for each. Apart from this, the two lands follow exactly the same transition rules and probabilities. The ants added on top have 1 more step of transition comparing to Langton’s ant, that is flipping a white cell to grey, grey to black, and black to white. 

Weaving Ants and Sword Ants are the precursors that led me to the idea of combining ants and forest fire for manmade looking and organic looking patterns to interact. Before this version, I tried to give the boundary of two regions a different shape, however I found out from Weaving Ants that the ants weave the best when there are already regular patterns and straight edges, therefore I stayed with the configuration of two lands divided by a straight line."	"It would be interesting if the boundaries of the two lands could shift depending on some calculation that judges which part is more active, to see how they could compete in terms of how much cells they occupy.

"	http://codepen.io/zmmrose/pen/gPXyXx	

> Great work. I especially like how from time to time an ant seems to escape into the forested region.  It was clever of you to redefine the states (empty/tree/burning) in each region, and how that changes the ants' response -- and to turn the ant actions to a 3-stage sequence. Weaving ants looks great by the way. Clever creation of initial conditions to bring out a different behavior in them. Sword ants is also a great starting condition -- I guess you played with that for a while?  I suspected the straight edge was for the ant's benefit. I'm tempted to suggest having the forest occupy a central band, with the other section above and below it -- or vice versa -- so that the toroidal behaviour is more understandable, and also because it could add a bit more drama to the organic/man-made contrast.  Yes, it can be difficult as more systems are connected to keep them in a good balance. It can be important to ask whether there are ways they can balance themselves, or whether a global governor is sometimes needed -- as you hint in your idea for extending the work.

211474228	2016-01-19 22:42:14	Alexei Sizov	Eternal Roads	Eternal Roads is a Mobile CA system that is set to replicate numerous roads that are constantly built and being destroyed. The system consists of a black grid and three white ant cells that move around the grid, turning cells that they move through to white to represent the building of the roads. The ants turn according to predetermined rules as well as delete white cells that are nearby as they move. This creates an indefinite process of building new structures while the old ones are being destroyed. The general image that is created by the system after it has been running for a bit looks like numerous "roads" that all intersect by going "above" or "below" each other	"The three main ant cells will interact with other white cells that they hit. This interaction involves turning 90 degrees and removing the white cell at the location of the turn. However there is another factor that determines the turn. Each ant has a counter that increases whenever a white cell is hit. Only when the counter reaches 10, the 90 degree turn will happen and the counter will be reset back to zero. Additionally there are various locations on the grid that are randomly generated to be a white cell at the beginning of the simulation. This provides a unique behavior every time the simulation is run. 

Whenever an a white cell is in front or to the sides of the moving ant this cell will turn back to black in order to free up more space and allow the system to keep running. There is a chance that two of the ants could fall into cyclic behavior, but generally, the system should be able to run indefinitely"	The first variation of this system had a completely different algorithms. Instead of "lines" the system stuck to generating single cells in close proximity but in a much larger grid. As these cells were generated they would move a predetermined amount in one direction as well as deviating from its path based on a random variable. As these cells move populate the grid they would take the appearance of "pathways" since they will be clustered along a path in a direction, since each new cell will not deviate by much and will stay close to the path, however it could also make the path wider. This system was scrapped because I felt it was too random and decided to focus on smaller scale, more concrete rules	Ideas for future extension involve mainly implementing more behaviors like more timed rules similar to ignoring every white cell until the 10th or special boundary behaviors that alter the ant movement if it hits a wall of the grid	http://codepen.io/asizov/pen/KVyYpo	
211575289	2016-01-16 11:40:59	James Ott	Earth Worms	The code works by randomly giving a worm a position and a type. There are two types of worms, a poop worm and a food worm. A poop worm moves in empty spaces until it does not have another place to move because of its own or another worms path. A poop worm can only move N,E,S,W, when a poop worm can not move anymore it dies and it reborn in a random position. A food worm can only move along the path of a poop worm or the poop worm itself but can move N,NE,E,SE,S,SW,W,NW allowing for it to jump paths if they are close together. When a food worm cannot move it must wait until a path comes close enough to jump too and can continue moving. A food worm eats everything and drops empty space in its path which allows for a poop worm to move in that space if reborn there. This creates a very interesting and always changing design. It is fun thing to try is, keeping track of a single food worm and see the path that it takes. I was surprised by how much movement formed from the poop worms being randomly dropped on a food worms path I thought the chances would be very slim.	There are seven global parameters that can be changed for different variations. The field size will change the size amount of cells. The field.set(1) as 1 or 0 will change if the earth starts as food or empty. The dirt, path, poop and food color can all be changed for different effects. Also the amount of worms in the field can be changed, a large amount gives smaller path lengths and a smaller gives larger paths in the beginning. 	My original idea was to work with the forest fire code that you made and turn it into a battle for space between roads that are building themselves and the trees expanding. I first worked on the road system and had many issues with the road building itself by going over all the cells. I changed it to a system like Langton Ants with different rules to make the roads look more like roads. Once I was happy with the road system, I tried to add the forest fire code but because it was a system that wanted to go over all the cells and not just the roads cell it did not mesh correctly. I added multiple roads to see how they would interact with each other but eventually it would find a stable state where I wanted it to always be in motion. At this point it was looking more like worms then roads and I changed it to reflect that. I added a worm that would eat another worms trail and jump between trails to keep the screen always in motion and always changing.	I would like to try changing the colors of the cells so that it is visually easier to see the different worms and their paths. Another future extension could be adding more types of worms and giving them different movement settings. 	http://codepen.io/jamesott/pen/RrLpxx?editors=001	
211588639	2016-01-20 13:45:56	lalaine ulit-destajo	Langton's Biped	"This is a various on Langton's Ant. however instead of active cell, movements are based on an active cell pair[head,tail].  I thought I would be able preserve some of the characteristics of the Ant however in this implementation I did not. There is chance that the cells will not be flipped. When the field becomes too full the biped will change(both cells if they are the same type), until some time has passed. 

Its not that interesting as the Ant. It tends to stablize after a bit. "	"Changing the fliprob will change the probability of the cell pairs being paired depending their combination(same or different). 

There are various field setups that one could play with, from a grid arrangement, to columns, to an semi-random field. 

There are also various bipeds to play with. 
- one in the lower left corner [head,tail]
- one that spawns in the center  [head,tail]
- one that cell's pair are randomized  [random,random]"	"Based on lagton's Ant, however instead of active cell, movements are based on an active cell pair[head,tail]

Movements are based on the cardinal directions (N,NE,E,SE,S,SW,W,NW).  If both cells are filled its directions +2, if one cell is filled its direction+1.

There is some probability chance for the cells being flipped..

As the screen tends to get filled, when the limit has been reached, the cells will be filled with the opposite fill, until the cooldown time has passed."	The implementation of states I think would help this project, instead of a cell being on or off. 	http://codepen.io/lulitd/pen/mVqggq	
211670734	2016-01-20 14:45:14	Peace Ayorinde	antPattern 	"I started with the ant automata developed in class. I tweaked it so that the ants move in varied steps (between 5 and 15 units) depending on their direction. This variation in units created a new pattern 

Long term behaviour is homogenous i.e stable, for the most part "	"With this modification, the interaction between my two ants created a new pattern from what was seen in the original or in class 

My challenge was that the field filled quickly. "	"The transition rules for this project are largely the same with the one developed in class. The differences in antPattern are the starting point of the two ants, their spin and direction. 
Also how many units they move based on their direction 
eg. if direction == 2, the ant moves down 10 units "	"I originally wanted to affect the neighbours around the mobile cells as opposed to the ants themselves. 

I will try that for possible extensions of this project"	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/QyaNwY?editors=001	
211696150	2016-01-20 13:24:01	Sophie Roginsky	Grain of Life	The cellular automata I implemented was the Abelian Sandpile model, a system which displays self organized criticality (Per Bak, 1987). The main idea of this model is the ability of a system to maintain a limited amount of stress. Once a cell on the grid surpasses its critical threshold, the stress collapses into its neighbouring cells. The results is a cascading or avalanche effect. What is interesting about this system is that it will continue to grow infinitely on its own, a single drop having the potential to reorganize the whole structure. 	Most of the variables can be changed to explore the different effects of the sandpile. For example, the value of the grains, the critical point, the amount of grains dropped on the surface, as well as the dispersion to different neighbourhoods. I also experimented with different probabilities of the direction of the collapse. Although an even distribution is more symmetrical and aesthetically pleasing, in nature there tend to be other factors that effect the direction and amount of dispersion. However, the Abelian model does not depend on order. 	A single grain is continuously dropped into one cell of the field. Once this cell reaches a critical point, it collapses. The grains are then dispersed into the neighbouring cells, based on a von Neumann neighbourhood. The amount of grains dropped is pre-defined, but this system has the potential to grow infinitely. I set the value of each grain to 0.25, as I was interested in    exploring the visual effect of the sandpile in greyscale. Once the grains reach the edge of the surface, they hit a static boundary.   	"I was interested in creating multiple sandpiles in order to examine how they would react to one another. Such as, allowing for user interaction with the mouse to create sandpiles at different locations. 

Creating an initial uneven surface should also produce different results.  

Exploring the concept of ""sinks"", which is a cell on the grid that only receives but never gives.  "	http://codepen.io/skyro/pen/VeyaWy	
211697042	2016-01-18 00:03:00	Victor Zohni	Broken Diamonds 	What started with Graham’s “Multiple Langton Ants” evolved into a quasi-random Cellular Automata that focuses on the interaction of two “ants” and how they change direction. I find it quite interesting because even though the start is randomized, it eventually produces the look of a city from an isometric perspective. The overall feelings of a cyberpunk world akin to Blade Runner and The Matrix seem present.	I added two new variables with affected the “ant direction”, count and spinValue. The spinValue starts off as a randomized value in-between 1 and 4, and the count acts a timer, counting up every time an interaction with a white cell occurs. After a certain period of time, the spinValue increases by 1, which then changes the direction of the ant during interaction. This is great as it showcase a unique movement over time.	"Dealing with the count and spinValue variables was just a matter of using if statements, this output ultimately relies on the wrap method. I experimented with different start positions in the grid for the ants to start, but aesthetically I preferred it starting in the middle. 

Originally I was thinking about having a X shaped pattern created from scratch, and then see the results but I loved the diamond shape of Multiple Langton Ants. Just playing around with the variable lead to this creation. 
"	Future extensions include adding colour to the equation. I would love to see the change of colour occur as the spinValue variable change over time. I think artistically it could look quite nice aesthetically. I would also play around with more directional changes, and have the project reset the cells after a certain period of time. 	http://codepen.io/victorz/pen/QyqeZo	
211724655	2016-01-20 09:37:37	Si Qi Zhou	Bacterium	In Bacterium, a field is initialized with some random noise. The noise creates crystalline like structures that are in a stable state. Some of these crystals begin to join together getting increasingly larger. As it grows bigger, the crystals begin to take on the appearance of bacteria cultures. Over time the growth covers the entire field with undulating bacteria. The transformation from stable crystalline structures to a more chaotic organic form is fascinating to observe. While I had originally intended to create a cellular automaton that would grow, the visual transformation was a pleasant surprise. After the bacteria overtakes the whole field, it continues to undulate with no stable state in sight.	If the field sum exceeds 4444 then parts of the field will start dying off. This was done to prevent the bacteria from reaching a static state.	The algorithm behind Bacterium was mainly derived from Conrad's Game of Life, but the visual result of the bacteria and its growth was inspired by Forest Fire. For the most part, a lot of the technical realization was spent adjusting the variables to produce the most aesthetically appealing outcome.	For future extensions of this project, I would like to add user interactivity in the form of scrapping. By holding down and dragging their mouse, the user can kill off parts of the bacteria by "scrapping" the culture. I'd also like to see if it is possible for the project to transform from its bacteria culture state into its crystal state.	http://codepen.io/zhousiqi/pen/Rrjzxb	
212174488	2016-01-19 21:07:54	Dale Rosen	Fade Transition	Clicking will reset the canvas. 	"The canvas shifts from light to dark across the gray-scale. The rules by which cells die and are reborn are very similar to Game of Life but, the initial conditions and the neighborhood is defined differently, which produces a very different result. If you stare at it for long enough, it becomes quite mesmerizing. 
"	There was a point where I was struggling to find a way to  to get the whole canvas to change at the same time. Some parts of the canvas were changing but, there were parts of the canvas that would stay the same through consecutive transitions.  I was motivated by the Forest Fire simulation. The forest fire simulation seemed very fast, as if it were simulating fires, in an area given geographic area, over the course of many months, or even years. I wanted to slow down the burn and growth rate and focus on a completely filled plot of land. The growth and burn rate still did not feel natural, so I decided to just focus on demonstrating the slow transition.  	"These mesmerizing transitions could easily be used for interactive installation display. I could definitely see this being projected onto a wall inside or on the exterior of a building. The next iteration would most likely be multicoloured and the speed of the transition could be based on the proximity of a person to the display surface.    
"	http://codepen.io/DMWR/pen/xZPMXr	
212216164	2016-01-20 00:16:03	Eldon Gonio	Lazy Ants	"I made it in a way to show the ants are being lazy. When the user pressed on the screen, the ants thinks ""they have been caught slacking off"" and starts working again. But after a few seconds, they will just slack off and just wander around.

I created 4 different functions that changes the behaviours of the ants.

(Ant Mode)
1) Horizontal - makes them move horizontally
2) Vertical - makes them move Vertically
3) Normal - like a normal Langton Ants behaviour

(Lazy Mode)
4) Lurker - makes them move randomly but doesn't leave/change the surroundings

So basically, the ants will start in the ""lazymodes"" where they just seems to run around the canvas. When the user pressed on the canvas, the ants will be  in Ant mode( moves horizontally, vertically or normal) based on a randomizer. In ant mode, they will be doing the same thing as langton ants.

Sometimes, when 2 ants bump into each other, both of them will combine and starts working again. 
"	"For Interactions:

The users needs to click on the canvas in order make the ants ""do their work"""	"At first, I actually tried to just make everything timed based. But I thought, having the user input will make more sense when the ants are getting ""caught slacking off""

Also, I was kind of inspired by the game Red Light/Green Light but I didn't have enough time to actually implement the whole rules for the game."	For Future, I would actually make it look like the game Red Light/Green Light. Were the "lazy ants" will slowly follow the cursor but user presses the mouse(green light), they will randomly  move around away from the cursor.	http://codepen.io/eldon14/pen/jWaJoa	
212248183	2016-01-20 19:45:57	Derek Martin	Waves	Going into this project I didn't have a distinct idea, I thought I would just experiment by combining various systems until I found something interesting. This system was built from a combination of the Game of Life's sweeper, Brian's Brain and the Forest Fire system. Together it creates a new ecosystem of swimming cells which are constantly interrupted by a large wave. What I find interesting is how the wave dissolves as it sweeps across the screen, leaving behind a trail while also interrupting the motion of the swimming cells. The system also has no end state, which I think helps create a sense of endless series of waves similar to the ocean.	Similar to the Game of Life sweeper, the wave interacts as a external force  sweeping the swimming cells. Since it's based on the Forest Fire CA it does exhibit a probabilistic CA. This system could also be classified as chaotic since the initial pattern is quickly destroyed by the surrounding elements.	"This system was built from a combination of the Game of Life's sweeper, Brian's Brain and the Forest Fire system. 

I did try creating other complex systems by using S/B/C rules(http://www.mirekw.com/ca/rullex_gene.html), but I just couldn't get them running."	I think this system would really benefit from adding colour. The black cells would be blue, the white could be green to represent fish, and the grey could be yellow or brown to represent food. Also, making this into a complex system would add more interest, such as fish populating or dying off if they have/don't have food. 	http://codepen.io/derekmartian/pen/LGeRZP	
212255014	2016-01-19 23:30:36	William Cook	Langton's Scanner	This system was based on Langton's Ant, but it is forced to move drastically downwards with each step and east with each step. This forces the ant to invert each of the blocks and generates a group of segmented patterns initially. Each of this patterns of travels is then used to create a new patch of travel for the ant, once it crosses the initial starting point of the patter,  but without the use of a double buffer. Unlike the original, where the ant had some freedom to travel about the field using it's original conditions, my new law forces the ant to change his pattern based entirely on the state of the previous. 	The main point of this exercise for me was to see how Langton's original ant would react if it was forced to visit all of it's paths with as much constancy as possible. Naturally this lead me to test out a new law that makes the ant revisit the past trail, and then if the state is white, switch it to black and double the number of steps the ant takes (8 versus Langton's original 4) The other variable change I made was in the south column I forced the ant to travel down 5 units every step to create a scanner effect.	I played around with various CA, with a focused interest on the Q*Bert Neighbourhood. Although I couldn't figure out how to replicated this in Java script, I wanted to generate a similar looking pattern, but liked how Langton's ant created some form of agency in the application of CA. Naturally I felt inclined to restrict this "agent" and force it to work with it's own past pathing. This started with a single column  design, but i switched to the sweeping patter to encompass the whole field. this also allowed the "agent" to enter clear cut stages of change when the overlap of paths occurs at the origin. 	Possible extensions included a deeper progression of rules for the ant to follow. Although I very well could have implemented some of them here, I wanted to focus primary on the long-term effect of the ant running through these stages and patterns, and avoid it looking like a jumbled noisy mess. This could also be evolved to include a count of the "agents" iterations and give it adaptability based on the number times it reaches the points of origin and cycles over its past patterns.	http://codepen.io/willcook21/pen/mVqvPL?editors=001	
212257382	2016-01-20 03:34:06	Cordelia Kwan	Formulation	Formulation is a system where disorder slowly becomes order. The system of seemingly “messy” cells form patches of ordered rows and these patches continue to grow until it fills up the space. The system is interesting because of the way the patches move throughout the space and because of how the patches can combine with others as well. The system is class 1 as it’s long term behaviour is stable and it evolves into a homogeneous state.	The state of each cell is determined by the neighbouring cells. Most of the rules in the system checks to see if neighbouring cells from opposite ends are the same (for example: north vs south, northwest vs southeast, etc.). It also counts the neighbour total and it changes its state based on that as well.	I started with the code from The Game of Life since it already included ways to access the Moore neighbourhood of a cell. Next, I changed the state transition function. I took out most of the rules from The Game Of Life and tried different algorithms until I got what I wanted.	"- Improve the algorithm so that there are no leftovers when all the cells have reached “order”
- Add additional behavior to the cells when the system reaches a homogeneous state so that the system can continue to change after it reaches “order”.
"	http://codepen.io/corkwan/pen/ZQXjqq	
212269379	2016-01-19 22:07:54	Vivian Cheung	CellularAutomata1	The system uses the multiple Langton's Ant system as a stepping stone and has 4 ants that start from the bottom of the canvas and travels to the top. At the half way point, these ants change behaviour, instead of travelling in a straight line. The system "stops" when all ants continuously travel right to left.	The direction of the ant's pattern is random therefore can be changed to anything and will provide different variations of patterns.	I played around with the ant behaviour and wanted to have the ants start in the middle of the canvas and have some ants travel up and some ants travel down. But it did not produce the right effect when it was implemented.	Possible extensions for this project would to be to manipulate the end-term behaviour so that the system does not plateau and come to a standstill.	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/WrXOOR	
212317152	2016-01-20 11:48:06	Jennifer Wu	Traffic Fluid	While I was playing around with the Block Rules codepen from class, I created an interesting variation that looked like traffic flow. Intrigued, I referred to the course notes and realized that rule 184 is a 1D traffic particle CA. Upon further research, I found the Biham--Middleton--Levine traffic model, where some cars (squares) move to the right and other cars move down. I thought I would try to implement this into a block-rule CA. The result of my implementation was quite interesting -- a gradient was created with blocks moving right or left, creating a diagonal visual effect. This first implementation (http://codepen.io/jnnivv/pen/rxYXGb) involved only one type of car, who's state was 1. In the second implementation (http://codepen.io/jnnivv/pen/adEvWK), I attempted to add two types of cars, one with a state of 1 and one with a state of 0.5. The gradient created with this was less noticeable than in the first implementation. Both of these implementations don't support phase transitions, in which a type of car will wait for the other to pass through first. The long-term behaviour of both is a constant stream of moving particles (or cars), in which the flow of the particles look almost fluid-like, like a waterfall.	Looking at Traffic 2 (http://codepen.io/jnnivv/pen/adEvWK) where the block rule involves two types of cells (1 or 0.5), I populated the field randomly with cells with either states of 1, 0.5, or 0. If you increase the probability (initially 0.001 to 0.1) that a cell will be 0.5, the CA changes dramatically. "Traffic" appears to move normally along the boundaries, but changes direction in the center of the field. There is no interaction support.	Originally I wanted to create a particle CA that moved like water. My initial attempt looked more like traffic (after letting it settle - http://codepen.io/jnnivv/pen/jWagbZ), so I was then inspired by the Biham--Middleton--Levine traffic model. Using the 2x2 block rule, I experimented with what would happen if a block moved down or right if the space was "empty" (0). I then added that if another state into the block rule to see if it changed the movement of the particles. In the update function, I added the random probability that a cell would turn to 0, otherwise the field would eventually be overtaken by white. Both looked a bit like moving fluids in the end!	I would like to correctly implement the Biham--Middleton--Levine traffic model with phase transitions and possibly more state cells (if one type of cell moves down, another moves right, and another moves left, etc), and in colour. 	http://codepen.io/jnnivv/pen/rxYXGb 	
212324471	2016-01-19 23:45:47	Candice Ho	Stability	I edited the Game of Life and added some probability factors to it. I also increased the noise factor at the start of the game. I wanted to code in factors that would reflect life in reality. I was hoping to see it clear out of its chaotic state eventually but it seems to go on forever. In reality, population is like that as well naturally. Instead of clearing out, humanity seems to survive and multiply. I guess in a way, it is a good representation.	Changing the initial noise factor doesn't change much as I hoped. It starts off very differently whether it was set to 10 or 1, it seems to eventually end up on the same state. It looks rather chaotic and doesn't get better or worse in the end.	I wanted to try and affect cells in certain areas, I liked the effects of some of the other patterns and wanted to apply it to my Game of Life. I wasn't able to as the Game of Life isn't asynchronous. 	I wanted to add more complex factors to it but due to being ill for a week made me unable to work on this as much as I would have liked. I would have liked to add boundary factors and changed the initial conditions as well. I would have liked to also experiment with different neighbourhoods as well.	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/yePrXQ?editors=001	
212356762	2016-01-17 23:56:36	Jeffrey Kwan	Rise and Fall of Civilizations	"So this system is a modified version of the Forest Fire code. I wanted to add some more interactions with this system so I thought I could do a Nature vs Human vs Disaster simulation. Basically, it starts with a fall of a civilization (yellow pixels) and then leads to random nature elements (green pixels) and small civilizations being formed around the canvas. Naturally, civilizations require resources to expand so when a yellow pixel intersects with a green pixel it assimilates it. Now as history has foretold us, there is always disasters happening whether it's natural or man-made no one can specifically predict 100% when the next one will strike. So the odds of a disaster event is (what I think) relatively average. And disasters destroy both nature and civilizations. If the two are more closely connected, the bigger the disaster. 

This system is interesting because to me it feels like a simulator for human history. You have this cycle of Nature -> Civilizations -> Destruction and then the cycle repeats again because naturally thats what nature does and perhaps a new civilization will rise from the ashes.

The only long term behavior supported is that there is no end-game. Nature can never be truly destroyed and civilizations will spawn and always require resources from nature to grow."	As mentioned above the current interaction is (Civilizations > Nature) < Disasters. I have tried some tinkering with the probability for the chance of growth or disaster events. In the end, I settled with nature having a higher chance of reproducing/being created than the civilization pixels since it noticeably shows the assimilation effect of a civilization pixel taking over a huge group of nature pixels. For the disaster, I think the sweet spot so far is 1/25000 as it doesn't overwhelm the simulation by completely destroying everything every 5 second but it's not too slow to the point where the whole canvas would be filled with yellow pixels.	"Starting with the Forest Fire code, I have to admit (as someone who is not a pro JS programmer) the code looked deceivingly simple. There were some fiddling with trying to change the colors of the cells and figuring out how the cell comparison function actually compared cells. But I figured out most of it but before that I had this version:

 http://codepen.io/TheTankJacker/pen/KVXOxY?editors=001

which did have an end-game, although it would have taken some time to get there. This version didn't have a working comparison if else algorithm so apparently the civilization pixels were immortal."	Some interesting expansion to this project would be to incorporate a time/age counter Ex: 100 B.C -> 50 B.C or 1960 ->1970 etc. so there would be a perception of time and how much time goes by. Also coding an Earth-like map to the canvas and adding algorithms to it such as water and land where only nature, civilization and disasters can happen would make it look like a more realistic simulation of Earth's history.	http://codepen.io/TheTankJacker/pen/QyqXxO?editors=001	
212409934	2016-01-20 00:26:51	JUN CAO	Reflection	Every time the system will generate patterns randomly and all the cells will follows the pattern and making the interaction with others follows the rule inside the pattern. The ideas is coming from curious about what will happen if I split the view and make a little bit difference between the views and the both side will follow on the same interaction rules.  	The system checks the cells status, if the cell status is alive, but the cell still will die when the neighborhood is too crowed or lonely.  The cells will rebirth when it has more than 3 neighbours. Otherwise, the system triggers the buring system.	Firstly I changed the initialize noise to make some difference by separating the view into two pieces. And then I tired combining the "1D Rule" and the "Game of life". It works something similar which generated the interesting patterns without adding colour to it, but sooner all the cells walks randomly, it looks like the game of life with the view moving forward. I want the cells interaction with others remaining on the pattern generated by the system. After I combined the "Game of life" and the "Forest in the color", I found the effect I expected.	At a certain time, the system will getting chance to regenerate the new patten and cells will rebirth and interaction with others follows the current rule. 	http://codepen.io/anon/pen/BjmBjM?editors=001	
212429973	2016-01-20 21:06:16	Michael Stuart	Black_Plague.js	After seeing the ForestFire project i wanted to make it seem more organic and less like squares burning away trees, as if it was a disease.  I drew a lot of inspiration in terms of look to growing mold spores especially from the visuals from the title sequence of "the Last of Us" (which can be viewed here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rnp4-RoRxSo)	i modified the project to change more into an illness with the individual pixels being people that catch the disease by proximity, but have a chance to not to.  once sick there is also a chance that the cell does not die, instead becoming a carrier cell that does not die but can spread the disease further (unless contracting the disease again in which it has a chance to die once again)	the technical realization of the project is based mainly on the ForestFire (therefor a Probabilistic CA)with another agent added and more complexity within the agents that existed already.  illness (the fire) does not have a 100% chance of infecting a pixel and those that do become infected do not have a 100% chance of "dying" and instead can become carriers of the illness infecting other pixels later, making more un-infected pixels and possibly contracting the active virus again facing the coin flip of death vs becoming a carrier.  	if i was to expand this project i would further continue the organic look of it by adding a gradient to the pixels dying, where each step would be another 10 percent increase or decrease, for pixels dying or being born respectively.	http://codepen.io/Teriaki/pen/MKreWJ?editors=001	
Demeester	2016-01-20 12:51:25	Rick	Cellular Automata	"I was attempting to make a system that would scroll across the screen and at the same time would not settle into a steady state. ie, I didn't want it to look like the cells would stop moving across the screen.

A main things I was looking for was that the systems' edges were not straight, but more flowing and looked more wave like.

"	"Global parameters included the vonNeumann neighborhood and the Moore Neighborhood.

Key and mouse events were thought about being utilized, but were ultimately ruled un-useful at this time."	"My initial idea was to take this system and if it did settle into a steady state, to automatically re-populate itself and start over.

By adding the future.set function as an else if statement, I was attempting to do this."	"I would like to make obstacles that they system would move around in possible future additions. Adding key events would prove useful if this was  used as a modeling tool and needed a reset key.

Also, because color was not asked for in this project. I would love to be able to add color to each cell as the system moves."	http://codepen.io/RickD/pen/NxwoJP?editors=001	