title: Reading
importance: 5

---

# A collection of interesting reading

[Bachelard, Gaston. "The Poetics of Space, trans." Maria Jolas (1958) (1969): 127.](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13269.The_Poetics_of_Space)

> Rare is the work of philosophy that invites both the casual reader and the academic. Rare, too, is the text so universal that luminaries across an array of fields lay claim to it. Yet, that is precisely the case with Gaston Bachelard’s The Poetics of Space. A rumination on the spaces we inhabit and the dreams and memories that fill them, this seminal work continues to be studied and enjoyed by philosophers, architects, writers, and literary theorists alike.

[Sutherland, Ivan E. "The ultimate display." Multimedia: From Wagner to virtual reality (1965).](http://worrydream.com/refs/Sutherland%20-%20The%20Ultimate%20Display.pdf)

> We live in a physical world whose properties we have come to know well through long familiarity. We sense an involvement with this physical world which gives us the ability to predict its properties well. For example, we can predict where objects will fall, how well-known shapes look from other angles, and how much force is required to push objects against friction. We lack corresponding familiarity with the forces on charged particles, forces in non-uniform fields, the effects of nonprojective geometric transformations, and high-inertia, low friction motion. A display connected to a digital computer gives us a chance to gain familiarity with concepts not realizable in the physical world. It is a looking glass into a mathematical wonderland. Computer displays today cover a variety of capabilities. Some have only the fundamental ability to plot dots. Displays being sold now generally have built in line-drawing capability. An ability to draw simple curves would be useful. Some available displays are able to plot very short line segments in arbitrary directions, to form characters or more complex curves. Each of these abilities has a history and a known utility.
> See also [the sword of Damocles](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sword_of_Damocles_(virtual_reality)) and this [commentary](http://www.wired.com/2009/09/augmented-reality-the-ultimate-display-by-ivan-sutherland-1965/) by scifi author Bruce Sterling

[Youngblood, Gene, and R. Buckminister Fuller. Expanded cinema. New York: Dutton, 1970. (almost any chapter could have inspirational relevance...)](http://www.vasulka.org/Kitchen/PDF_ExpandedCinema/book.pdf)

> Expanded Cinema by Gene Youngblood (1970), the first book to consider video as an art form, was influential in establishing the field of media arts.[1] In the book he argues that a new, expanded cinema is required for a new consciousness. He describes various types of filmmaking utilizing new technology, including film special effects, computer art, video art, multi-media environments and holography.

> "When we say expanded cinema we actually mean expanded consciousness. Expanded cinema does not mean computer films, video phosphors, atomic light, or spherical projections. Expanded cinema isn’t a movie at all: like life its’ a process of becoming, mans’ ongoing historical drive to manifest his consciousness outside of his mind, in front of his eyes."

[Gibson, William. Neuromancer. Ace, 1984.](http://project.cyberpunk.ru/lib/neuromancer/)

> Neuromancer is a 1984 novel by William Gibson, a seminal work in the cyberpunk genre and the first winner of the science-fiction "triple crown" — the Nebula Award, the Philip K. Dick Award, and the Hugo Award.[1] It was Gibson's debut novel and the beginning of the Sprawl trilogy. The novel tells the story of a washed-up computer hacker hired by a mysterious employer to pull off the ultimate hack. [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuromancer)

[Simon Penny. "Virtual Reality as the End of the Enlightenment Project" In Culture on the Brink: the Ideologies of Technology. Virtual Reality Casebook, Eds Anderson and Loeffler, Van Nostrand, 1994](http://simonpenny.net/texts/enlightenment.html)

> Brethren, Welcome to the First Church of Jesus, Lord of Virtual Space, where you, like Thomas, can thrust your hand in the wound of Christ. You can absolve your sins by taking up His cross on the way to Golgotha. The Church of Jesus, Lord of Virtual Space can deliver to you what the faithful and non-believers alike have yearned for for so many generations: Proof! Here and now I want to extend an invitation to each and every one of you to join me, each Sunday, in the comfort and privacy of your own home, in the most scientific, the most up to date, religious experience that is available today. Join me every sunday as we live the life of Christ together. You can witness the sermon on the mount, the betrayal in the garden of gethsemany; you'll hear the cock crow, you will be there! Don your holy eyephones and come with me, through the chapels of the stations of the cross, suffer with your savior, take Christ into your heart, and step into the body of Christ. Then join me in virtual communion, where angels will pass you golden goblets direct from the flowing wounds of the crucified christ! For only $599 and a low monthly rental, you can visit the Kingdom of the Lord (or something very like it), every Sunday. Our Fathers' house has many mansions, and I want to show you just a few of them. Picture if you will, this scene: in living rooms across the country, a parish of believers wearing eyephones, negotiating invisible obstacles, falling on their knees. But inside the eyephones its a different world, the streets are sandy, the sun near- eastern hot, the crowd is yelling as Pilate hands down his judgement. A Christian virtual theme park.

[Viola, Bill. "Will there be condominiums in data space?." Multimedia: From Wagner to Virtual Reality (NY: WW Norton & Company, 2001) (1980).](http://classes.design.ucla.edu/Spring06/259M/readings/viola.pdf)

> Bill Viola has been one of the highest-profile of video artists, allowing him to create, in recent years, what some have called "70 millimeter" video art—work in which video's lower cost is not a primary attraction for the artist, and the traditionally rough production values of video art are not present. However, what has remained consistent from Viola's grittier early work to his massive late-1990s retrospective at the Whitney Museum is a poetic approach to exploring the video medium. As Michael Rush wrote in his New Media in Late 20th Century Art, "Bill Viola's work, perhaps more than any other, represents the tendency toward the lyrical in art". This view of Viola's work is perhaps instructive when considering the essay reprinted here—for example, during his discussion of the MIT Media Lab's famous Aspen Movie-Map. The project was brilliant, but limited by the fact that it was structured around a video hardware hack (as discussed in Andrew Lippman's paper from SIGGRAPH 1980) which was mapped onto a navigation system meant to be as familiar as possible, so as to bring something already imagined to life. It remained for artists to seek, instead, surprise, and to create defamiliarizing forms of interaction that would allow the technology to be envisioned anew, instead of as a step toward making real what we already expected.

[An Interview with Jaron Lanier](http://www.jaronlanier.com/jaron%20whole%20earth%20review.pdf), 1989

> Jaron Zepel Lanier (/ˈdʒɛərɨn lɨˈnɪər/, born May 3, 1960) is an American computer philosophy writer, computer scientist, and composer of classical music. A pioneer in the field of virtual reality (a term he is credited with popularizing), Lanier and Thomas G. Zimmerman left Atari in 1985 to found VPL Research, Inc., the first company to sell VR goggles and gloves. In the late 1990s, Lanier worked on applications for Internet2, and in the 2000s, he was a visiting scholar at Silicon Graphics and various universities. From 2006 he began to work at Microsoft, and from 2009 forward he works at Microsoft Research as Interdisciplinary Scientist.

[Krueger, Myron W. Artificial reality II. Addison-Wesley Professional, 1991.](http://www.amazon.ca/Artificial-Reality-2-2nd-Edition/dp/0201522608)

> Artificial reality was the term Myron W. Krueger used to describe his interactive immersive environments, based on video recognition techniques, that put a user in full, unencumbered contact with the digital world. He started this work in the late 1960s and is considered to be a key figure in the early innovation of virtual reality. His first book Artificial Reality was published in 1983 and updated in Artificial Reality II in 1991 (both published by Addison-Wesley).
> ([A related paper](http://cast.b-ap.net/arc619f11/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2011/09/krueger-ResponsiveEnvironments.pdf))

Heim, M. The Metaphpysics of Virtual Reality. OUP, 1993. [Excerpt](http://web.stanford.edu/class/history34q/readings/Michael_Heim/HeimEssenceVR.html)

> Computers have dramatically altered life in the late twentieth century. Today we can draw on worldwide computer links, speeding up communications by radio, newspapers, and television. Ideas fly back and forth and circle the globe at the speed of electricity. And just around the corner lurks full-blown virtual reality, in which we will be able to immerse ourselves in a computer simulation not only of the actual physical world, but of any imagined world. As we begin to move in and out of a computer-generated world, Michael Heim asks, how will the way we perceive our world change?

[Moser, Mary Anne, and Douglas MacLeod. Immersed in technology: art and virtual environments. MIT Press, 1996.](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/immersed-technology)

> The Banff Centre for the Arts has become synonymous for what's hot in the electronic arts, a place where professional artists come to produce new work and develop new skills. This book brings together critical essays along with artists' projects to explore the many issues raised by the creation of virtual environments and to provide a glimpse into worlds that have been much discussed but rarely seen. The book opens with eleven essays that approach the social and cultural implications of cyberspace from the perspective of cultural studies, communications, art history, art criticism, English, and women's studies. These are followed by nine virtual environments (along with statements of what the artists are trying to accomplish in both theoretical and technical terms), created as part of the Art and Virtual Environments Project at the Banff Centre.

Davies, Char, and John Harrison. "Osmose: towards broadening the aesthetics of virtual reality." (1996).

[Davies, Char. "Osmose: Notes on being in immersive virtual space." (1998): 65-74.](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14626269808567111)

[Char Davies. Virtual Space. In Space: In Science, Art and Society. François Penz, Gregory Radick and Robert Howell, eds. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press (2004) pp. 69-104](http://www.immersence.com/publications/char/2004-CD-Space.html)

> I have been working in "virtual space" for nearly 10 years, and during that time have produced two major works, the virtual environments Osmose (1995) and Ephémère (1998)[1]. Integrating full body immersion, interactive 3D digital imagery and sound, and navigation via a breathing interface, these works embody a radically alternative approach to immersive virtual space, or what is commonly known as "virtual reality" or "VR". Rather than approaching the medium as a means of escape into some disembodied techno-Utopian fantasy, I see it as a means of return, i.e., of facilitating a temporary release from our habitual perceptions and culturally-biased assumptions about being in the world, to enable us, however momentarily, to perceive ourselves and the world around us freshly.

[Novak, Marcos. "Transmitting Architecture: The Transphysical City". www.ctheory.net. article a034. Arthur and Marilouise Kroker, Editors. 11/29/1996.](http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=76) 

[Novak, Marcos. "Trans terra form: liquid architectures and the loss of inscription." (1997).](http://www.krcf.org/krcfhome/PRINT/nonlocated/nlonline/nonMarcos.html)

> How is it that our imaginations can so easily oustrip the real and the pragmatic? Why are we not limited to straightforward foresight and anticipation? How is it that we can shift our attention and concentration from the pressing questions of the ever-burning, inevitable present, and focus instead on the chimerical future? What mechanisms allow us to enlarge the scope of our concerns beyond the narrow confines of our needs and times?

[Novak, Marcos. "Speciation, Transvergence Allogenesis Notes on the Production of the Alien." Architectural Design 72.3 (2002): 64-71.](http://www.mat.ucsb.edu/~marcos/transvergence.pdf)

[Manovich, Lev. The language of new media. MIT press, 2001](http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/language-new-media)

> In this book Lev Manovich offers the first systematic and rigorous theory of new media. He places new media within the histories of visual and media cultures of the last few centuries. He discusses new media's reliance on conventions of old media, such as the rectangular frame and mobile camera, and shows how new media works create the illusion of reality, address the viewer, and represent space. He also analyzes categories and forms unique to new media, such as interface and database. Manovich uses concepts from film theory, art history, literary theory, and computer science and also develops new theoretical constructs, such as cultural interface, spatial montage, and cinegratography. The theory and history of cinema play a particularly important role in the book. Among other topics, Manovich discusses parallels between the histories of cinema and of new media, digital cinema, screen and montage in cinema and in new media, and historical ties between avant-garde film and new media.

Stephenson, Neal. Snow crash. Spectra, 2003. [Excerpts](http://www.wenovel.com/topic/snow-crash.html)

> In reality, Hiro Protagonist delivers pizza for Uncle Enzo’s CosaNostra Pizza, Inc., but in the Metaverse he’s a warrior prince. Plunging headlong into the enigma of a new computer virus that’s striking down hackers everywhere, he races along the neon-lit streets on a search-and-destroy mission for the shadowy virtual villain threatening to bring about infocalypse. Snow Crash is a mind-altering romp through a future America so bizarre, so outrageous…you’ll recognize it immediately.

[Grau, Oliver. Virtual Art: from illusion to immersion. MIT press, 2004.](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/virtual-art)

> Although many people view virtual reality as a totally new phenomenon, it has its foundations in an unrecognized history of immersive images. Indeed, the search for illusionary visual space can be traced back to antiquity. In this book, Oliver Grau shows how virtual art fits into the art history of illusion and immersion. He describes the metamorphosis of the concepts of art and the image and relates those concepts to interactive art, interface design, agents, telepresence, and image evolution. Grau retells art history as media history, helping us to understand the phenomenon of virtual reality beyond the hype. Grau shows how each epoch used the technical means available to produce maximum illusion. He discusses frescoes such as those in the Villa dei Misteri in Pompeii and the gardens of the Villa Livia near Primaporta, Renaissance and Baroque illusion spaces, and panoramas, which were the most developed form of illusion achieved through traditional methods of painting and the mass image medium before film. Through a detailed analysis of perhaps the most important German panorama, Anton von Werner's 1883 The Battle of Sedan, Grau shows how immersion produced emotional responses. He traces immersive cinema through Cinerama, Sensorama, Expanded Cinema, 3-D, Omnimax and IMAX, and the head mounted display with its military origins. He also examines those characteristics of virtual reality that distinguish it from earlier forms of illusionary art. His analysis draws on the work of contemporary artists and groups ART+COM, Maurice Benayoun, Charlotte Davies, Monika Fleischmann, Ken Goldberg, Agnes Hegedues, Eduardo Kac, Knowbotic Research, Laurent Mignonneau, Michael Naimark, Simon Penny, Daniela Plewe, Paul Sermon, Jeffrey Shaw, Karl Sims, Christa Sommerer, and Wolfgang Strauss. Grau offers not just a history of illusionary space but also a theoretical framework for analyzing its phenomenologies, functions, and strategies throughout history and into the future.

[Whitelaw, Mitchell. "System stories and model worlds: A critical approach to generative art." Readme 100 (2005): 135-154.](http://art.runme.org/1140026085-5226-0/system_stories.pdf)

> In his article «System Stories and Model Worlds: A Critical Approach To Generative Art» Mitchell Whitelaw Canberra(AUS) proposes to bridge what has been detected by various authors, the unproductive gap between «software formalism» and «software culturalism». While formalism tends to be visually abstract, and thus corresponds to the field of generative art, the culturalist approach, on the other side, suggests that software art is predomi- nantly critical/political, focusing on and deconstructing software as cultural text. Refusing what he calls binary thinking, Mitchell Whitelaw instead proposes to overcome this split by calling for a «critical generativity». Such an approach would deconstruct the system stories contained in the formal objects used by generative art and thus would critically analyze their implications. To put it shortly, it would allow to «read generative software art according to the critical paradigm of the software culturalists» (Whitelaw).

[Popper, Frank. From Technological to Virtual Art. MIT Press, 2007.](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/technological-virtual-art)

> In From Technological to Virtual Art, respected historian of art and technology Frank Popper traces the development of immersive, interactive new media art from its historical antecedents through today's digital, multimedia, and networked art. Popper shows that contemporary virtual art is a further refinement of the technological art of the late twentieth century and also a departure from it. What is new about this new media art, he argues, is its humanization of technology, its emphasis on interactivity, its philosophical investigation of the real and the virtual, and its multisensory nature. He argues further that what distinguishes the artists who practice virtual art from traditional artists is their combined commitment to aesthetics and technology. Their "extra-artistic" goals—linked to their aesthetic intentions—concern not only science and society but also basic human needs and drives. Defining virtual art broadly as art that allows us, through an interface with technology, to immerse ourselves in the image and interact with it, Popper identifies an aesthetic-technological logic of creation that allows artistic expression through integration with technology. After describing artistic forerunners of virtual art from 1918 to 1983—including art that used light, movement, and electronics—Popper looks at contemporary new media forms and artists. He surveys works that are digital based but materialized, multimedia offline works, interactive digital installations, and multimedia online works (net art) by many artists, among them John Maeda, Jenny Holzer, Brenda Laurel, Agnes Hegedus, Stelarc, and Igor Stromajer. The biographical details included reinforce Popper's idea that technology is humanized by art. Virtual art, he argues, offers a new model for thinking about humanist values in a technological age.

[McRobert, Laurie. Char Davies' Immersive Virtual Art and the Essence of Spatiality. University of Toronto Press, 2007.](http://www.immersence.com/publications/2007/2007-LMcRobert.html)

> In this first book-length study of the internationally renowned Canadian artist Char Davies, Laurie McRobert examines the digital installations Osmose and Ephémère in the context of Davies' artistic and conceptual inspirations. Davies, originally a painter, turned to technology in an effort to create the effect of osmosis between self and world. By donning a head-mounted display unit and a body vest to monitor breathing and balance, participants are immersed in 3D-virtual space where they interact with abstract images of nature while manoeuvring in an artificial spatial environment. Char Davies' Immersive Virtual Art and the Essence of Spatiality explores spatiality through a broad scope of disciplines, including philosophy, mythology, biology, and visual studies, in order to familiarize the reader with virtual reality art - how it differs from traditional artistic media and why immersive virtual art promises to expand our imaginative horizons. This original study provides us with an important exposition of two of Char Davies' acclaimed projects and an exploration of the future impact of digital virtual art on our worldviews.

[Russett, Robert. Hyperanimation: digital images and virtual worlds. John Libbey Publishing, 2009.](http://www.amazon.com/Hyperanimation-Digital-Images-Virtual-Worlds/dp/0861966546)

> Hyperanimation offers a critical overview of a new and expanded form of animation that uses advanced digital technologies to create fresh and innovative works of art. Unlike academic texts or popular surveys, Hyperanimation is composed of interviews with the artists themselves―those creative individuals who are actually shaping this new direction and who, in their own words, provide detailed information about their works as well as insights into our contemporary technological culture. A readable collection of individual perspectives accompanied by historical backgrounds, biographical profiles, and lavish illustrations, this volume explores a broad spectrum of groundbreaking animation projects ranging from interactive installations and virtual environments to digital theater and telematic imaging. Included are interviews with pioneers in the field: Paul Kaiser, Karl Sims, Char Davies, Dan Sandin, Jeffrey Shaw, Rebecca Allen, Miroslaw Rogala, Roy Ascott, Paul Glabicki, and others whose seminal works have significantly transformed the art of animation.

[Whitelaw, Mitchell, Mark Guglielmetti, and Troy Innocent. "Strange ontologies in digital culture." Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 7.1 (2009): 4.](http://teemingvoid.blogspot.ca/2008/04/strange-ontologies.html)

> The concept of a “strange ontology” is articulated via the intersection of philosophical and computational definitions of ontology. Within digital media, each simulated world requires both; an ontology, to define its existence as data; and a subject, the player or user, who engages with the simulation. Glitches or interventions in these simulations create ontologies that are inconsistent with our lived experience, rendering them “strange.” We draw upon a range of works to illustrate this concept, including game art, social networking software, Guglielmetti's “Laboratories of though” and generative art. This article aims to define this concept and outlines a terrain for further investigation.

[Shanken, Edward A. "Art and Electronic Media." (2009).](https://books.google.ca/books/about/Art_and_Electronic_Media.html?id=GRSVoAEACAAJ&redir_esc=y) ([seen here](https://mediacultures.net/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10002/606/shanken_aem_survey-small.pdf?sequence=1))

> A timely survey that addresses the relationship between art and electronic technology, including mechanics, light, graphics, robots, virtual reality and the web. Shanken (media art history, Donau Univ., Austria) pulls off the difficult task of providing a coherent overview of the changing relationship between electronic technology and fine art in the 20th century. Shanken's mastery is evident in his opening essay, which charts the evolution of technology in art. The seven thematic chapters (on motion, electronic production, responsive environments, surveillance, surrogate beings, simulations, and institutions and exhibitions) are lush with full-color images of electronic media. The book surveys over 200 artists from more than 30 countries and includes their biographies and insights about electronic media via artist statements and manifestos. ([source](http://www.bookverdict.com/details.xqy?uri=Product-59626504196155.xml))
> Also there is an [online companion site](http://artelectronicmedia.com) that continues to be updated.

[Ebert, Roger. "Video games can never be art." Roger Ebert’s Journal (2010).](http://www.rogerebert.com/rogers-journal/video-games-can-never-be-art)

> Having once made the statement above, I have declined all opportunities to enlarge upon it or defend it. That seemed to be a fool's errand, especially given the volume of messages I receive urging me to play this game or that and recant the error of my ways. Nevertheless, I remain convinced that in principle, video games cannot be art. Perhaps it is foolish of me to say "never," because never, as Rick Wakeman informs us, is a long, long time. Let me just say that no video gamer now living will survive long enough to experience the medium as an art form.

[Samyn, Michael. "Not a manifesto." Notgames blog (2010).](http://notgames.org/blog/2010/03/19/not-a-manifesto/)

> Can we create a form of digital entertainment that explicitly rejects the structure of games? What is an interactive work of art that does not rely on competition, goals, rewards, winning or losing?

[Cline, Ernest. Ready player one. Random House, 2011.](http://io9.com/5831527/read-the-first-two-chapters-of-ernest-clines-dystopian-gamer-novel-ready-player-one). *[seen here](http://artax.karlin.mff.cuni.cz/~gurss5am/rpo/Ernest%20Cline%20-%20Ready%20Player%20One.pdf)*

> In the year 2045, reality is an ugly place. The only time teenage Wade Watts really feels alive is when he's jacked into the virtual utopia known as the OASIS. Wade's devoted his life to studying the puzzles hidden within this world's digital confines—puzzles that are based on their creator's obsession with the pop culture of decades past and that promise massive power and fortune to whoever can unlock them. But when Wade stumbles upon the first clue, he finds himself beset by players willing to kill to take this ultimate prize. The race is on, and if Wade's going to survive, he'll have to win—and confront the real world he's always been so desperate to escape.

> [A film adaptation of RP1 is now in process, directed by Steven Spielberg.](http://deadline.com/2015/03/ready-player-one-movie-steven-spielberg-ernest-cline-warner-bros-1201398299/)

[Blascovich, Jim, and Jeremy Bailenson. Infinite reality: Avatars, eternal life, new worlds, and the dawn of the virtual revolution. William Morrow & Co, 2011.](http://www.infinitereality.org/authors.html) -- Introduction excerpt [here](http://www.infinitereality.org/book/introduction_excerpt.pdf)

> How achievable are the virtual experiences seen in The Matrix, Tron, and James Cameron’s Avatar? Do our brains know where “reality” ends and “virtual” begins? In Infinite Reality, Jim Blascovich and Jeremy Bailenson, two pioneering experts in the field of virtual reality, reveal how the human brain behaves in virtual environments and examine where radical new developments in digital technology will lead us in five, fifty, and five hundred years.

McGonigal, Jane. Reality is broken: Why games make us better and how they can change the world. Penguin, 2011. *[Chapter 1 seen here](http://hci.stanford.edu/courses/cs047n/readings/Reality_is_Broken.pdf)*

> More than 174 million Americans are gamers, and the average young person in the United States will spend ten thousand hours gaming by the age of twenty-one. According to world-renowned game designer Jane McGonigal, the reason for this mass exodus to virtual worlds is that videogames are increasingly fulfilling genuine human needs. In this groundbreaking exploration of the power and future of gaming, McGonigal reveals how we can use the lessons of game design to fix what is wrong with the real world.

Carse, James. Finite and infinite games. Simon and Schuster, 2011. *[Chapter 1 Seen here](http://wtf.tw/ref/carse.pdf)*

> With this philosophy text, Carse demonstrates a way of looking at actions in life as being a part of at least two types of what he describes as "games", finite and infinite. Both games are played within rules, as agreed upon by the participants; however, the meaning of the rules is different for the two types of games. The book stresses a non-serious (or "playful") view of life on the part of "players", referring to their choices as "moves", and societal constructs and mores as "rules" and "boundaries". He regularly employs familiar terms in specialized ways, but casts them as associated with finite or infinite play & players. Boundaries are "rules" that one must stay within when playing a finite game, in contrast with horizons, which move with the player, and are constantly changing as he or she "plays". In short, a finite game is played with the purpose of winning (thus ending the game), while an infinite game is played with the purpose of continuing the play.

[Huhtamo, Erkki. Illusions in motion: media archaeology of the moving panorama and related spectacles. MIT Press, 2013.](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/illusions-motion)

> Beginning in the late eighteenth century, huge circular panoramas presented their audiences with resplendent representations that ranged from historic battles to exotic locations. Such panoramas were immersive but static. There were other panoramas that moved--hundreds, and probably thousands of them. Their history has been largely forgotten. In Illusions in Motion, Erkki Huhtamo excavates this neglected early manifestation of media culture in the making. The moving panorama was a long painting that unscrolled behind a “window” by means of a mechanical cranking system, accompanied by a lecture, music, and sometimes sound and light effects. Showmen exhibited such panoramas in venues that ranged from opera houses to church halls, creating a market for mediated realities in both city and country. In the first history of this phenomenon, Huhtamo analyzes the moving panorama in all its complexity, investigating its relationship to other media and its role in the culture of its time. In his telling, the panorama becomes a window for observing media in operation. Huhtamo explores such topics as cultural forms that anticipated the moving panorama; theatrical panoramas; the diorama; the "panoramania" of the 1850s and the career of Albert Smith, the most successful showman of that era; competition with magic lantern shows; the final flowering of the panorama in the late nineteenth century; and the panorama's afterlife as a topos, traced through its evocation in literature, journalism, science, philosophy, and propaganda.

[Zimmerman, Eric, and Heather Chaplin. "Manifesto: The 21st Century Will be Defined By Games." (2013)](http://kotaku.com/manifesto-the-21st-century-will-be-defined-by-games-1275355204)
> Previous centuries have been defined by novels and cinema. In a bold manifesto we're proud to debut here on Kotaku, game designer Eric Zimmerman states that this century will be defined by games.
> Also this response from [Ian Bogost: Winning isn't everything.](https://medium.com/matter/winning-isnt-everything-255b3a26d1cf)

Schell, Jesse. The Art of Game Design: A book of lenses. CRC Press, 2014. *([seen here](http://www.sfu.ca/~lws2/summercamp/Art_Game_Design.pdf))*

> Anyone can master the fundamentals of game design - no technological expertise is necessary. The Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses shows that the same basic principles of psychology that work for board games, card games and athletic games also are the keys to making top-quality videogames. Good game design happens when you view your game from many different perspectives, or lenses. While touring through the unusual territory that is game design, this book gives the reader one hundred of these lenses - one hundred sets of insightful questions to ask yourself that will help make your game better. These lenses are gathered from fields as diverse as psychology, architecture, music, visual design, film, software engineering, theme park design, mathematics, writing, puzzle design, and anthropology. Anyone who reads this book will be inspired to become a better game designer - and will understand how to do it.

[Various contributors (open source). Making 360. Github, ongoing.](http://making360.com)

> Let no one say otherwise, shooting 360 video is difficult and intense! It’s a medium that has completely unique challenges. And that is exciting for both the tech folk and the storytellers. But you’ll need to understand the many hurdles so that you can soar. Knowing the specific details, inherent limitations, and potential problems will only help to inform how to successfully create immersion. And that is what this book aims to do! We know technology will evolve exponentially, softwares will update, hardware will become smaller, lighter, and more efficient. The chapters we have written thus far could be irrelevant as of yesterday. so please continually constantly self-develop with us.

## Collections

[David Marlett's Cinemersia Research Literature Review](http://www.dmarlett.com/cin-lit-review)

## Blog etc.

[http://www.roadtovr.com](http://www.roadtovr.com)

[https://www.oculus.com/blog/](https://www.oculus.com/blog/)

[http://www.theverge.com/a/virtual-reality](http://www.theverge.com/a/virtual-reality)

[http://vrguy.blogspot.ca](http://vrguy.blogspot.ca)

[http://doc-ok.org](http://doc-ok.org)

[http://www.virtualrealityreviewer.com](http://www.virtualrealityreviewer.com)

[http://www.polygon.com](http://www.polygon.com/2015/3/26/8294989/ccp-is-changing-the-virtual-reality-game-using-kinects)

[http://www.reddit.com/r/virtualreality](http://www.reddit.com/r/virtualreality)

