title: VR
importance: 9

----

# The What and Why of Virtual Reality

> "A new medium can suggest a multitude of approaches. In 1929, Dziga Vertov's *[The Man with the Movie Camera](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z97Pa0ICpn8)* catalogued possibilities for the evolution of film. From narrative structures to special effects, it shows *what cinema could have become*. Virtual reality occupies a similar historical moment--it is unformed and hence its possibilities seem unconstrained." 
> "Although the artistic community has often been excluded from the development of new technologies, this situation is changing. Artists no longer sit on the sidelines eventually to become grateful users of borrowed tools but have become active in development, creating a disturbance in the field with new contingencies... A new medium like Virtual Reality challenges traditional conventions not because the participant wears a helmet or glove but because it suggests new relationships between the viewer and the viewed... Unfortunately, as the medium of virtual environments becomes more and more defined, different approaches will be ignored, abandoned, or forgotten as the medium coalesces into a mature form."
> - *Douglas MacLeod, Director of the Banff Art and Virtual Environments Project*, in the preface of [Moser, Mary Anne, and Douglas MacLeod. Immersed in technology: art and virtual environments. MIT Press, 1996.](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/immersed-technology), emphasis added.

The above citation neatly captures the aims of this course. In 2016, twenty years since this was written, and nearly fifty years since virtual reality's birth, it will finally become a widely-available consumer medium. Sony, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, Samsung, Valve, nVidia, Apple and many other large corporations are now gambling on VR's success. At a major computer graphics convention (SIGGRAPH) panel ([The Future is Here](http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/behind-screen/siggraph-oculus-rift-creator-says-724481)), drawing together many key figures from these tech giants in late 2014, the pivotal nature of the moment was utterly clear. Palmer Luckey, Oculus CEO: "I think it will be VR content and software that will drive the industry long term" - Palmer Luckey, Oculus CEO. AR pioneer Steven Feiner of Columbia University emphasized that "entertainment is the next big thing in VR." ... and that those who are starting to create VR content "will be so far ahead when the hardware is ready." ... Calling this time the "Wild West" for VR, senior director at the Sony Magic Lab, Richard Marks agreed, saying "there are no established genres. You don't get that opportunity very often." What can the development of cinema tell us about the the explosion of virtual reality (VR) in our imminent future? Theories, methods, and unique modes of expression have yet to be established by the collision of gaming technology with cinema. As with any emerging medium, a willingness to break rules, abandon habits and re-learn is necessary. 

> "The future of VR lies in the unique experiences that get created in software, and if I knew what those would be, even in broad outline, I would be very happy." Michael Abrash, Chief Scientist, Oculus VR 